[Music]
so one of the things that we said at the
beginning of this course is that when we
learn to write scripts then we can go on
to do some automation
so here is our chance to see how the
automation actually works in linux
where the
scripts can be scheduled
and they can be recurring
and they can be made to execute
automatically
so the concept that makes this possible
is called the cron concept
so the
service is called cron d it's a daemon
that is running which makes a list of
scripts to run at their scheduled time
incessantly every day every hour
as per their original
scheduled times
so there are some tools that enable
a task to be executed at a particular
time or at a recurring time
and also for the system also to maintain
itself
and particularly one such task is to
rotate the log files
because the log files tend to keep on
increasing in size as the system gets
used so they need to be rotated
and
many of these repetitive tasks are taken
up by the crown system
so we need to look at some
directories where some of these files
are located so we will go and look at
those files
so i encourage you to look at these
directories in your linux computer so
that you understand what kind of jobs
are running automatically
every hour or every day or every week or
every month
now a job that is listed in the quran
system like when you are making an entry
for crontab for example it has a
particular
sequence of fields which will help the
system understand what is the frequency
with which you want to run that
particular task
so here in the middle i have given the
command
and the first field is the minute
so
the fifth minute
is when the job has to be run
okay so you can also give every 10th
minute by saying that you know
5 by 10
so there are ways by which you can
mention every nth minute also but here
we are saying every 5th minute this
particular
script will be executed
and which hour 2 means that at 2 am that
is 205
is the time when the script will be
executed exactly at 205 am it will be
executed
the third field is about the day of the
month
so if you want a job to be running on
every first of month you can give one
there every tenth of the month you can
put a 10 there but if you put a star it
means that it will be run on every day
of the month
okay the fourth field is telling
which month
okay so you may have a task which will
run on a particular day on a particular
month also for example on every fourth
of february i want a particular task to
be run so i can actually also configure
that way and if you have a star it means
that every month it will be taken up so
the way we have written the first four
fields is that every month
every day of the month at
2 am
colon 0 5 minute
that's when the script has to be run
now which days of the week also can be
configured so that certain tasks you may
want to do on a sunday because the
system load will be less
or you may want to do it on monday
morning because that's when the week
starts
or friday night because that's when the
week is over so there are different
reasons when you want to run particular
tasks so one hyphen five means monday to
friday so weekdays okay so weekdays it
will running again you can put a star
there so that every day of the week can
be interpreted
then the next field we have written root
it means
when the script is being executed
in whose name it should be executed so
under which user name should it be
executed so this will be given
by the root with any other user's name
or under the root name itself after that
everything else that follows is a
commander so you can have multiple
commands by
using the
command combination
characters that we have learnt the
double ampersand or double pipe you can
even put everything in one script file
and just leave it like that also
so this particular
line tells that
the
every
day
on every weekday at 205 am
a script will be run which is
mkbackup.sh
and it will be run if successfully the
directory has been changed to slash home
slash scripts slash backup which means
that if there is any problem in the
changing the directory then the script
will not be running ok so this is the
way a
entry can be made to the cron tab so
that the cron daemon can run
the task
at the respective frequencies that we
have provided
now there are also some scripts that are
available which will be running
automatically when the machine is
starting okay so at every time you boot
the machine there are certain scripts
that will be running automatically to
basically set up the configuration for
network setup the configuration for the
x window system that is coming and
showing you the windows so all kinds of
things will be running and those are
available in slash it is slash init and
a bunch of scripts in slash init etc
unit.d
now there are also
certain scripts that will be running as
per the run level we have chosen so you
know that a linux machine though it is
meant for a gui
mode operation with a multi-user it can
also be made to run in other modes like
a single user mode for debugging and
fixing some errors etcetera so these
modes are listed here there are seven
different modes that are possible
so ah at each of these modes the linux
system will perform certain actions
and what scripts it should run will also
be listed in the directory slash etc
rc
and then the level
of the
run level
mode number dot d
so run level 0 means when it is about to
shut down and power off so if there is
anything that has to be done at that
time those scripts will be available in
rc 0 dot t
now when it is booted in a single user
mode it will be rc1.d
will contain all the scripts that will
be executed
rc5.d is the default mode in which linux
is actually made use of by all of us
okay so most of the scripts that are
running in the background when you start
using the machine
you can actually go there and see what
are those
and whenever you want to reboot the
machine it is a more six so those
scripts will be running so if you want
certain actions to be performed
automatically when the machine is
shutting down
or when the machine is booting or when
the machine is in a multi-user mode or a
single user mode etc you can customize
all of them
by placing those scripts in the
respective directories and then rest of
it will be taken care by the run level
execution of the linux operating system
so we can look at an example of running
a crontab entry right now and we will
choose the timing in such a way that
after waiting one or two minutes it will
actually execute and we can see the
output
already on the screen
so i
try to create a script here
make mk backup dot sh
so first i will
say
starting backup automatically
and i would like to write it
to a log file
so mk backup dot log
okay and then
this file i may want to store it with
the name
so that i don't have to type it always
now next what i would do is
run the command
just for an example date command i will
just run it so that the output is
written
then i will say
backup
process
completed
and then some kind of a
string that tells me that we are done
once so when it runs multiple times the
log file will be appended again and
again so that is something that we can
use to look at whether it is running
properly
so that
we don't have
okay any error because the file was not
there etc okay so now we have got the
script that is kept readily
so we can
we can make an entry crown tab minus e
so that this particular
script can be executed so before we do
that let us check the permissions so it
is actually the sh file is not having
any permissions to execute so we will
give that
and let us check it works or not
and
so you see that now the size has changed
so
cat
mk backup mkbackup.log
so you see that the output has been put
in okay you can see that the
date timestamp is matching okay so what
we do is
we will go back
to that file and
empty it so that the file is empty
and now we will actually set up a cron
tab so that this particular
script will be executed automatically
now when you are first time opening the
cron tab for a particular user
it will ask which editor is your
favorite because later on it will open
an editor where you can actually type
that particular crown type entry
within the same editor so we are already
familiar with va editor so we will go
ahead and use that so
uh two
okay now there's a file that has been
created which is meant for the cron tab
so here the
last line is giving you some kind of a
example also
okay so here there is an example here
okay so we what we will do is that we
will actually
go ahead and look at the time and
accordingly give the entry
so
time is 24 so i will say 27th
minute
of
every hour
every day
and then
put a star there and this is for user so
i don't have to mention my name okay
now
look at the date um so 25 so i have
given
three minutes so we will wait for three
minutes
and then the
script should have executed in which
case the size
should have changed so we will wait and
see when does it change
so let us see what's the time now 2708
and sure enough there is a
entry that is done here and
automatically it has been executed
and let us see what was there in that
so you can see that it has been executed
exactly at 11 27 0 0 and at 0 1 the
entry has been made so it means that
exactly when we specified the time
that's when it was running so this is
one way by which we can actually make a
crontab entry
and have the scripts automatically run
and these can be for various purposes so
we have some purposes like rotating the
log taking backup
cleaning up some temporary files
or maybe
alerting
us
by a
email when something goes wrong in the
system so all those analytics etc can be
written as basically shell scripts and
we have a system in cron where the shell
script is executed at a time that we
want with the frequency that we want and
that's all that we need so that an
automatic execution of the scripts is
benefiting us
for the administration of the machine or
for any routine tasks so let us look at
some of these routine tasks that are
being done
so cron tab is
there in etc directory and you can see
that there are some
some scripts that are already there
listed okay you can see that
at 17th minute on every day
there are some things that are done with
the crown data hourly
and at
25th minute
at every sixth hour that is at 6 25 a.m
there is a code that is run that is
anachron which is basically by the
system administrator to run and it is
running the daily parts so if there is
any task in the current or tail when
does it run it runs at
6 25 am okay and similarly at 6 47 am of
every
sunday uh the crown dot weekly will be
run
and on the first of every month at 6 52
a.m the chron dot monthly tasks will be
run so what are those tasks let us go
and look at them
cron dot daily
so you see that there bunch of things
that are listed and one of them is log
rotate okay and also for package
maintenance okay and
certain maintenance activities
that are run including the google chrome
which is searching and checking for the
updated version etc
crown dot hourly if you see
every hour there is nothing that is
running okay so which means that
we don't have any task that is running
our every hourly
so there are some weekly tasks which
again
for man page
database updation
and anachron which is done by the system
and monthly if you see there is again
only one task which is belonging to the
system administrator so you can see that
by simply placing a script in any of
these directories you then are already
assured of it running at that particular
frequency every month or every week or
every day or every hour
and if you wish you can also make it run
at a particular
moment
in every
frequency that you are interested in by
simply making a crown tab entry and the
way to make the contract contact entry
is to
type the command current tab minus e as
a user and this file is available for
you to edit and we have one task which
is running at the 27th minute of every
hour
and then you know you can add some more
tasks if you wish so now time is 31 so i
change it to 32
and we will see one more entry that will
come up
okay so 123 bytes
okay so you will see that in a minute
you will see that it will be updated
okay so let us look at the time
32 okay you can see that the files has
increased
and let us look at the contents of
this log
and you see that it has been
written a second time exactly at 32
minute
okay which means that when we edited the
cron tab it ran as per the renewed
configuration
and it has done by itself which means
that now we have an ability to customize
a timely running of scripts has been
like and those scripts can be doing any
kind of an activity that we may have in
mind
regular maintenance or even processing
of data that keeps coming into our
folders by some network connections or
people posting it through websites and
so on
so i hope the
automation
aspect is quite clear and please do read
about the cron
system to learn more about this
particular aspect of linux operating
system